Docs: Add builtins documentation for cairo vm (#379)
NethermindEth/cairo-vm-go: docs/docs/vm-fundamentals/builtins.md

---
sidebar_position: 2
---
# Builtins Documentation #326

> # Builtins

Reviewer: You remove the lego part noooo 😱 

I liked that intro 😅

        [range_check_ptr] = x;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 1] = 2 ** 64 - 1 - x;
    
        // Check that 0 <= y < 2**64.
        [range_check_ptr + 2] = y;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 3] = 2 ** 64 - 1 - y;
    
        // Check that 0 <= q < 2**64.
        [range_check_ptr + 4] = q;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 5] = 2 ** 64 - 1 - q;
    
        // Check that 0 <= r < y.
        [range_check_ptr + 6] = r;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 7] = y - 1 - r;
    
        // Verify that x = q * y + r.
        assert x = q * y + r;
    
        let range_check_ptr = range_check_ptr + 8;
        return (q=q, r=r);
    }
    ```
    
- **ecdsa**
    
    A structure defines the memory layout for the signature builtin. It's employed by various functions in the common library, including the ecdsa builtin. For instance, in the verify_ecdsa_signature() function, there's an implicit argument of type SignatureBuiltin, which aids in tracking the next available builtin instance.
    
    The struct comprises two members of type felt:
    
    - **pub_key**: Represents an ECDSA public key.
    - **message**: Denotes a message signed by the pub_key.
    

>     Additionally, there's a pointer named ecdsa_ptr, which is of type SignatureBuiltin. This pointer is utilized to manage the signature builtin instances internally.

Reviewer: > ... This pointer is __used__ to manage ...

    
        let (candidate: EcPoint) = ec_sub(zG, rQ);
        if (candidate.x == sR.x) {
            return (res=TRUE);
        }
    
        return (res=FALSE);
    }
    ```
    
- **bitwise**
    
    This structure defines the memory organization for the bitwise built-in. It's utilized by functions in the common library that leverage the bitwise built-in functionality. For example, in the bitwise_xor() function, there's an implicit argument of type BitwiseBuiltin*, which internally manages the next available built-in instance.
    
    The struct consists of members of type felt:
    
    - **x**: Represents the first operand.
    - **y**: Represents the second operand.
    - **x_and_y**: Holds the result of the bitwise AND operation between x and y.
    - **x_xor_y**: Stores the result of the bitwise XOR operation between x and y.
    - **x_or_y**: Holds the result of the bitwise OR operation between x and y.
    
    Additionally, there's a pointer named bitwise_ptr, which is of type BitwiseBuiltin*. This pointer facilitates internal management of the bitwise built-in instances.
    
    ```rust
    from starkware.cairo.common.cairo_builtins import BitwiseBuiltin
    

>     const ALL_ONES = 2 ** 251 - 1;

Reviewer: You can just say
`const ALL_ONES = -1`

> # Builtins Documentation #326

Reviewer 2: why did you remove the sidebar position?

Also, please remove  `#326`

        [range_check_ptr] = x;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 1] = 2 ** 64 - 1 - x;
    
        // Check that 0 <= y < 2**64.
        [range_check_ptr + 2] = y;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 3] = 2 ** 64 - 1 - y;
    
        // Check that 0 <= q < 2**64.
        [range_check_ptr + 4] = q;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 5] = 2 ** 64 - 1 - q;
    
        // Check that 0 <= r < y.
        [range_check_ptr + 6] = r;
        assert [range_check_ptr + 7] = y - 1 - r;
    
        // Verify that x = q * y + r.
        assert x = q * y + r;
    
        let range_check_ptr = range_check_ptr + 8;
        return (q=q, r=r);
    }
    ```
    
- **ecdsa**
    
    A structure defines the memory layout for the signature builtin. It's employed by various functions in the common library, including the ecdsa builtin. For instance, in the verify_ecdsa_signature() function, there's an implicit argument of type SignatureBuiltin, which aids in tracking the next available builtin instance.
    
    The struct comprises two members of type felt:
    
    - **pub_key**: Represents an ECDSA public key.
    - **message**: Denotes a message signed by the pub_key.
    

>     Additionally, there's a pointer named ecdsa_ptr, which is of type SignatureBuiltin. This pointer is used to manage the signature builtin instances internally.

Reviewer 2: which points to a variable of type `SignatureBuiltin`

or which is of type `SignatureBuiltin*`

By convention, the functions that utilizing builtins receive a pointer to the unused memory location as an argument and return an updated pointer reflecting the next available memory slot. For example:

```
func hash2(hash_ptr: felt*, x, y) -> (hash_ptr: felt*, z: felt) {
  // Invoke the hash function.
  x = [hash_ptr];
  y = [hash_ptr + 1];
  // Update pointer (increment by 3) and return result.
  return (hash_ptr=hash_ptr + 3, z=[hash_ptr + 2]);
}
```

On the other hand, Starkware Cairo library provides typed references for improved readability. Here's the code rewritten with `HashBuiltin` type like this example:

```
from starkware.cairo.common.cairo_builtins import HashBuiltin

func hash2(hash_ptr: HashBuiltin*, x, y) -> (hash_ptr: HashBuiltin*, z: felt) {
  let hash = hash_ptr;
  // Invoke the hash function using typed access.
  hash.x = x;
  hash.y = y;
  // Update pointer and return result.
  return (hash_ptr=hash_ptr + HashBuiltin.SIZE, z=hash.result);
}
```

> ### Some specific builtins in Cairo VM

Reviewer: The code in this section is still wrong and doesn't reflect the actual usages of these builtins. It would be good for readers to easily copy the code into a cairo file and execute it.

Author: @rodrigo-pino can you tell me what is exactly wrong in this code please? I was guided by a very similar example in the Cairo documentation and I can't find what is wrong

Reviewer: Is not cairo code (except for output). I doubt you found this code in any documentation. Hope you can realize the obvious difference between the code the `output` builtin and the others

Reviewer: Yep, I am not talking about the code above this comment, I am referring to the code examples of the subsection **Some specific builtins in Cairo VM**. As you'll notice, is very dissimilar to the code example above this comment which is the one I am not referring to. 

The only builtin of the builtins listed in this section which is an actual Cairo example is the `output` builtins. The remaining builtins, the ones defined below the `output` builtins, listed in order of appearance:
1. Pedersen
2. Range Check
3. ecdsa
4. bitwise

Are not valid examples of Cairo Code

Author: Now I understand it much better, thank you

> - **output**

Reviewer: Output is great 👍

    
    The output builtin, accessed with a pointer to type felt, is used for writing program outputs.
    
    ```rust
    %builtins output 
    //allows the program to write this output to a designated memory location.
    from starkware.cairo.common.serialize import serialize_word
    func main{output_ptr: felt*}() { 
    //the output here indicate that parameter is a pointer to a memory location of 
    //type felt*. The location is used to store the program output 
        serialize_word(1234);
        serialize_word(4321);
        return ();
    }
    ```
    

> - **pedersen**

Reviewer: Let's make all the remaining builtins described (`pedersen`,  `range_check`, `ecdsa` & `bitwise`) to be explained just as `output` is described

Reviewer: meaning it's not cairo code. I cannot run the code in this examples because it won't compile

### Builtins and Cairo memory

**Builtins act as special extensions to the Cairo VM's memory, enforcing specific rules on designated areas.** 

Imagine the VM memory as a filing cabinet, builtins are like add-on modules that create special folders within the cabinet and each builtin gets its own folder and dictates the rules for what can be stored there. For instance, a "range-check" builtin might create a folder where all values must be between 0 and a very large number.

**Communication between the CPU and builtins happens entirely through this memory.** 

The CPU doesn't directly call builtins, instead, it treats the builtins memory folder like a special device to use a builtin. A function gets a pointer to the builtins folder as an argument, the function then reads or writes data to specific cells within the folder, following the rules set by the builtin. This method is similar to how external devices interact with a computer, they don't talk directly to the CPU but use the memory space for communication.

**Adding builtins doesn't require modifying the CPU itself.** 

> Both the CPU and builtins share the same memory space, making them efficient tools. Additionally, each function using a builtin receives a pointer and is responsible for returning a pointer to the next unused cell within the builtin's memory area. This ensures proper management of space allocated for each builtin instance.

Reviewer: Although the initial analogy with Legos is good, I don't think explaining the whole meaning with analogies is helpful rather than confusing. Bultins should be explained as what they are: special segments of the Cairo VM that behave a little different. The bring efficiency to the table by doing certain operations that with Cario set of instructions is extremely expensive at the cost of extra complexity when proving the program.

> ### General types of builtins in Cairo VM

Reviewer: This whole section is wrong. Neither Cairo Zero nor Cairo One use builtins in this way

- **Mathematical builtins.**
    

>     These perform various mathematical operations, potentially faster than using regular Cairo instructions. Examples include addition, subtraction, multiplication, bitwise operations (AND, OR, XOR, etc.), and some even handle more complex operations like modular exponentiation.

Reviewer: I am not aware of addition/sub/mul/div builtins. Could you share your source for this?

    
- **Cryptographic builtins.**
    
    These handle cryptographic functions used in zk-STARK proofs. Examples include functions for hashing (like Keccak) and various elliptic curve cryptography operations. Some examples are:
    
    **→ Keccak hashing:**
    
    This builtin performs the Keccak hash function, a one-way function that creates a unique and fixed-size output from any input data. It's used to compress data and ensure its integrity in zk-STARK proofs.
    
    **→ Scalar multiplication:**
    
    This builtin performs point multiplication on elliptic curves, a fundamental operation in elliptic curve cryptography (ECC). ECC is used for secure communication and signature verification in zk-STARKs.
    
- **Memory management builtins.**
    
    These help manage memory allocation and deallocation within a Cairo program. This can be crucial for optimizing memory usage. Some examples are:
    
    **→ Memory allocation:**
    

>     This builtin allocates a specific amount of memory within the Cairo VM for a program to use. This ensures the program doesn't try to access non-existent memory locations.

Reviewer: I am not aware that there is a builtin that performs this operations.

    
    **→ Memory deallocation:**
    

>     This builtin frees up memory that is no longer needed by a program. This prevents memory leaks and optimizes memory usage for subsequent computations.

Reviewer: Memory in Cairo is write-once, so there is never actually any deallocation. All memory written stays like that forever.

    
- **Comparison builtins.**
    
    These allow for comparisons between values, like checking if one value is greater than another. Some examples are:
    
    **→ Equal to:**
    
    This builtin checks if two felt values are identical. This is useful for conditional statements within a program.
    
    **→ Greater than:**
    

>     This builtin checks if one felt value is greater than another. This allows for branching logic based on the relative size of values.

Reviewer: I am not aware of this builtins as well, could you share their names with me?

    

### Specific builtins in Cairo VM

- **output**
    
    The output builtin, accessed with a pointer to type felt, is used for writing program outputs.
    
    ```rust
    // Function to add two numbers and write the sum to the output

>     func add(a felt, b felt) -> (felt) {

Reviewer: The way this parameters are declared is incorrect. In any case it would be:

```
func add(a: felt, b: felt) -> (felt) {
```

      let sum = a + b
      // Use the output builtin to write the sum to the program's output

>       output(sum)

Reviewer: This is not the correct way of using the output builtin

      }
      return x
    }
    ```
    
- **ecdsa**
    
    The ecdsa builtin, accessed with a pointer to type SignatureBuiltin, is used for verifying ECDSA signatures on a message using  public key.
    
    ```rust
    // Function to verify an ECDSA signature (complex example)
    func verify_signature(message felt, signature SignatureBuiltin, public_key felt) -> (felt) {
      // This example requires additional logic to unpack the signature and public key
      // and call the ecdsa builtin for verification. Refer to Cairo documentation for details.
      let is_valid = ecdsa(message, signature, public_key)
      // Handle the result of the verification (valid or invalid)
      return is_valid
    }
    ```
    
- **bitwise**
    
    The bitwise builtin, accessed with a pointer to type BitwiseBuiltin, is used for carrying out bitwise operations on felts.
    
    ```rust
    // Function to perform a bitwise AND operation on two numbers
    func bitwise_and(a felt, b felt) -> (felt) {
    //it checks if each bit position in a and b is a 1 at the same time  
      let result = bitwise(BitwiseBuiltin.AND, a, b)
      return result
    }
    ```
    

> ### How bulitins perform complex operations at the cost of extra constraints when proving

Reviewer: Builtins come with a cost, but what you describe in this section is completely unrelated as far as my knowledge goes. I personally don't find the knowledge in this chapter beneficial for understanding builtins.

    
- **ecdsa**
    

>     A structure defines the memory layout for the signature builtin. It's employed by various functions in the common library, including the ecdsa builtin. For instance, in the verify_ecdsa_signature() function, there's an implicit argument of type SignatureBuiltin, which points to a variable of type SignatureBuiltin

Reviewer: The full sentence should be like this
```suggestion
A structure defines the memory layout for the signature builtin. It's employed by various functions in the common library, including the ecdsa builtin. For instance, in the verify_ecdsa_signature() function, there's an implicit argument of type `*SignatureBuiltin`, which aids in tracking the next available builtin instance.
```
